Define the list of codecs in the v3 spec (#312)
zarr-developers/zarr-specs: docs/v3/core/v3.0.rst

``codecs``
^^^^^^^^^^

    Specifies a list of codecs to be used for encoding and decoding chunks.  The
    value MUST be an array of objects, where each object contains a member with the name

>     ``name`` whose value is a string. The ``name`` member identifies the specification for the codec.  A

Reviewer: Previously the requirement was `name` refers to a v3 codec spec, so I guess there would be a catalogue of v3 codecs where I could go an look up the specification.

Now the name is abitrary, so given the name how do I know where to find the codec specification, so if I get a bit of zarr data I can find out how to decode it.

And how do we avoid naming conflicts between community codecs? Or is this not our concern?

Reviewer: I think my concerns are resolved by changes under "Extension codecs" below, so maybe worth either repeating a bit of that or signposting that section here?

>     codec object MAY contain a member named ``configuration``, which is an object defined by the respective codec

Reviewer: I think this should be changed back to "parameter names and values" instead of "object", since this is a) out of scope of this PR, and b) I think parameter names and values makes more sense because this section is taking about a JSON document (I think??).

4. The chunk array ``A`` is equal to ``EC[0]``.

.. _codec-specification:

Specifying codecs
-----------------

.. _core-codecs:

Core codecs
-----------

This spec defines a set of codecs ("core codecs") which all Zarr implementations SHOULD implement in 
order to ensure a minimal level of interoperability between Zarr implementations.
Each core codec is each defined by specification documents which are hosted in the
`zarr-specs GitHub repository`_, and are published on the `zarr-specs documentation web site
<https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/>`_. The list of core codecs is part of the Zarr v3 specification. 
Changes to the list of core codecs MUST be made via the same protocol used for 

> changing the Zarr v3 specification. Changes to the list of core codecs SHOULD be made carefully and
> in close collaboration with extant Zarr v3 implementations. A new core codec SHOULD be added to the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changing the Zarr v3 specification. Changes to the list of core codecs SHOULD be made
in close collaboration with members of the Zarr Implementation Council. A new core codec SHOULD be added to the 
```
- Remove "made carefully", which is subjective. I'm not sure what was intended by "carefully", so perhaps this can be replaced by more concrete terms
- Since the zarr implementation concil contains mechanisms for communicating with implementations, I think makes sense to refer to it here.

Author: the Zarr implementation council does not represent all zarr implementations. Also, there are active proposals to remove the ZIC entirely. For both these reasons I think we should not mention it specifically here.

Reviewer: In that case I think it's important to point to an agreed upon list of community implementations that get to have a say on the list of core codecs, if this sentence is going to be included. I think it's important to be a bit more watertight here to avoid potential disputes in the future.

Author: Relying on such a list presupposes that we cannot dynamically tell who has an active zarr implementation. is this a real concern? realistically, if someone comes to this repo saying "I have a zarr implementation, I have problem X Y and Z", then we should listen to them, whether they are on a list or not.

Author: this PR is concerned with facilitating codec development for all zarr implementations, not just those written down on a list at some point in time. If the zarr spec developers find it useful to maintain such a list as a tool, then I consider that an implementation detail of spec development and not something that should be referenced specifically in the spec itself.

Reviewer 2: It is a bit funny because "an agreed upon list of community implementations" is what the ZIC is supposed to be and "Zarr implementation council does not represent all zarr implementations" is a shortcoming of the ZIC, imo.

> Also, there are active proposals to remove the ZIC entirely

At this point, there is no decision to remove it. Even if we change the decision making process in https://github.com/zarr-developers/governance/pull/44, we might still keep the ZIC as a review/advisory body. I think promoting a codec to a core codec is a good candidate for asking the ZIC.

Author: > Fair - is that one of the reasons the ZIC is being disbanded (sorry, I don't know the history there).

The ZIC is not necessarily being dissolved, but there is an [active proposals to remove the entity](https://github.com/zarr-developers/governance/pull/44). The main concern (from my POV) is that most of the members are not active in zarr spec development, i.e. the ZIC doesn't really do anything.

> list when a sufficient number of Zarr implementations support or intend to support that codec. 

Reviewer: What is sufficient? 50%? 80%? 100%? This should be clarified.

Author: Any number we pick will be arbitrary. I think we have to rely on people's judgment here.

Reviewer: I think picking and agreeing on an arbitrary number is better than not picking a number and then leaving the door open to discussions/disagreements in the future on what a "sufficient number" means.

Author: I guess because it's a "SHOULD" we can put in a completely arbitrary number and then ignore it. How about 60%

Author: or "an overwhelming majority"?

Reviewer: Maybe it's worth removing this sentence completely? I don't particularly like adding an arbitrary number either as per your comments 😄 . I think it would be fine to remove this sentence, and if someone wants to add a core codec they can justify it as part of the normal ZEP process.

> An existing core codec SHOULD be removed from the list when a sufficient number of implementation 
> developers and Zarr users deem the codec worth removing, e.g. because of a technical flaw in the 
> algorithm underlying the codec.

Reviewer: One of the main goals (to me) of specifying core codecs is to ensure backwards compatibility long into the future. Removing a codec reduces backwards compatibility, so I think there should be very strict conditions under which a codec should be removed.

```suggestion
Existing core codecs SHOULD NOT be removed from the list to ensure future backwards compatibiility.
A core codec MAY be removed from the list if it has fundamental security flaws that cannot be resolved and the removal is agreed by the Zarr Implementation Council.
```

Author: I don't think we need a reference to the ZIC here, since elsewhere in the PR I state that the list of core codecs should be changed according to the same process for changing the spec itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Existing core codecs SHOULD NOT be removed from the list to ensure future backwards compatibiility.
A core codec MAY be removed from the list if it has fundamental security flaws that cannot be resolved.
```

Author: "To ensure backwards compatibility, existing core codecs SHOULD NOT be removed from the list." reads better to me

Author: also something I thought of last night: if a codec is removed from the list of core codecs, it is still available as an extension codec. So I don't think there's actually a large backwards compatibility risk.

> Community codecs

Reviewer 3: Is "Community" used elsewhere? Maybe "Extension", which I think is used in other places ("extension data types" at least).

Author: I forget how I picked the word "community"... I don't think it's a term of art in the spec. If "extension" is a better fit I'm happy to switch to that.

Reviewer 4: I favor "extension" over community because it fits with the existing Zarr extension framework.

----------------

Zarr implementations MAY support a codec that is not in the list of core codecs 

> (hereafter termed a "community codec"), provided the community codec does not use an identifier 

Reviewer 3: Is it worth namespacing codec identifiers somehow? I'm slightly against, since ideally codecs can graduate from "community" (or "extension") to "core" (after careful consideration). It'd be nice to avoid needing to rewrite metadata files when that happens.

Author: If we do any namespacing of the identifiers, we should not use any information about whether the codec is core or community / extension, for the reasons you note. Otherwise I don't have a preference.

Reviewer 4: I think what is written here is fine. Namespacing codecs sounds complicated.

> that is already used by a core codec; the identifiers of core codecs are reserved.

Reviewer: Would be good to link to list of core codec identifiers here.

> This specification places no other constraints on community codecs. It is possible that separate 
> developers may define distinct codecs that use the same identifier. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This specification places no other constraints on community codecs. It is possible, through discouraged,
that separate  developers may define distinct codecs that use the same identifier. 
```
